>>IN THE FALL OF 1951...
>> Reporter: IN 1951, THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT STARTED TESTING
ATOMIC BOMBS IN NEVADA'S MOJAVE
DESERT, MEASURING THE EFFECTS OF
THESE WEAPONS FOR MILITARY
APPLICATIONS AND ON CIVILIAN
LIFE.
UNIVERSITY OF NEVADA-LAS VEGAS
PROFESSOR ANDY KIRK HAS STUDIED
THE ERA.
>> DID THEY REALLY BUILD FAKE
TOWNS OUT IN THE DESERT AND THEN
BLOW THE WHOLE PLACE UP WITH
ATOMIC BOMBS?
AND THE ANSWER IS YES, IN FACT,
THEY DID DO THAT.
>> Reporter: THEY WERE CALLED
"DOOM TOWNS."
AND, AS SEEN IN THIS 1955 PUBLIC
INFORMATION FILM, THE FEDERAL
CIVIL DEFENSE ADMINISTRATION
BUILT HOUSES, STOCKED THEM WITH
FOOD, AND PLACED FULLY-DRESSED
MANNEQUINS INSIDE TO LEARN WHAT
MIGHT SURVIVE AN ATOMIC BOMB.
>> WOULD FOOD IN THE AVERAGE
HOME BE SAFE TO EAT AFTER A
BLAST?
>> THE PURPOSE, AS STATED BY THE
CIVIL DEFENSE AGENCIES, OF
CREATING THESE "DOOM TOWNS" AND
THEN WIDELY DISSEMINATING IMAGES
AND FILM OF THEM BEING
DESTROYED, WAS TO ENCOURAGE
AMERICANS TO BE CONCERNED ABOUT
THE POSSIBILITY OF CIVILIANS
BEING THE TARGET OF NUCLEAR
ATTACK.
>> Reporter: "DOOM TOWNS" IS THE
TITLE OF ANDY KIRK'S NEW GRAPHIC
HISTORY ABOUT THIS ERA.
COLLABORATING WITH BRITISH
ARTIST KRISTIAN PURCELL, THE
BOOK WEAVES TOGETHER PRIMARY
DOCUMENTS, PHOTOS, AND THE ORAL
HISTORIES OF RESIDENTS,
SCIENTISTS, SOLDIERS, AND ANTI-
NUCLEAR ACTIVISTS.
>> INSTEAD OF JUST COLLECTING
EXAMPLES OF VISUAL HISTORY AND
COLLATING IT AND PRESENTING IT
IN SOME KIND OF A COFFEE TABLE
BOOK FORM-- YOU COULD ACTUALLY
THINK ABOUT DOING SOME OF THAT,
BUT ALSO IN CONJUNCTION WITH
TELLING THIS STORY AS A VISUAL
NARRATIVE.
SO, IN THE FORM OF A GRAPHIC
NOVEL, EXCEPT BASED ON CAREFUL
ARCHIVAL AND ORAL HISTORY
RESEARCH.
>> Reporter: KIRK FOUND THE
VISUAL STYLE OF A GRAPHIC
HISTORY WELL-SUITED FOR BRINGING
TO LIFE THE STORIES OF THE
PEOPLE WHO LIVED THROUGH NUCLEAR
TESTING, STORIES HE HELPED
COLLECT IN AN ORAL HISTORY
PROJECT PARTLY FUNDED BY THE
U.S. DEPARTMENTS OF ENERGY AND
EDUCATION.
PARTICIPANTS ARE LITERALLY DRAWN
INTO THE PANELS, AND DESCRIBE
NOT FULLY KNOWING ABOUT THE
HAZARDS OF RADIATION, HOW
SOLDIERS EXPERIENCED THE BLASTS
AT CLOSE RANGE AND WERE THEN
ORDERED TO MARCH TOWARD THE TEST
SITE TO SEE HOW THEY WOULD
RESPOND DURING AN ACTUAL ATTACK.
BUT THE TESTS WEREN'T ALL "DOOM
AND GLOOM," ACCORDING TO LAS
VEGAS NEWS PHOTOGRAPHER DON
ENGLISH, WHO RECALLED HOW HIS
PHOTOGRAPHS OF A DANCER IN FRONT
OF AN ATOMIC CLOUD BECAME ICONIC
IMAGES OF NEVADA'S NUCLEAR
TESTING LEGACY, AND HOW THE
BLASTS IN THE NEVADA DESERT
BECAME A DRAW FOR TOURISTS.
>> I'M NOT AN ARTIST, SO WHEN I
WATCH AN ARTIST WORK, I THOUGHT
IT WAS JUST REALLY COOL.
SO, THIS IS THE DRAFT SKETCH
THAT IS REALLY JUST COMING OUT
OF HIS HEAD AS HE'S ENCOUNTERING
PRIMARY HISTORICAL DOCUMENTS.
>> Reporter: KIRK'S BOOK
EXPLORES HOW THE BLASTS AFFECTED
NEARBY COMMUNITIES, AND HOW
NUCLEAR FALLOUT WAS MORE
UNPREDICTABLE THAN PORTRAYED BY
SCIENTISTS AND THE MILITARY.
>> THE PUBLIC INFORMATION TRIED
TO DEPICT TESTING AS CONTAINED
AND AS LOW-RISK.
BUT IN PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE,
THERE'S ALWAYS A TONE OF
UNCERTAINTY.
>> Reporter: EVENTUALLY, LOCAL
COMMUNITIES LEARNED FALLOUT FROM
SOME OF TESTS WERE FAR MORE
EXPANSIVE AND DANGEROUS THAN
THEY REALIZED, INCLUDING A LARGE
SHEEP KILL IN A WIDE RANGE OF
UTAH IN 1953.
>> THERE ARE MANY, MANY PEOPLE
WHO DIDN'T FUNDAMENTALLY OPPOSE
NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
THEY WERE PATRIOTIC.
THEY WERE EVEN WILLING TO MAKE
SACRIFICES PERSONALLY FOR THE
COLD WAR.
BUT THEY DID WANT GOOD
INFORMATION, AND THEY WANTED TO
BE TOLD THE TRUTH.
>>IT DETONATED PERFECTLY,
RELEASING ITS LETHAL RADIATION.
>> Reporter: THE LAST ABOVE-
GROUND NUCLEAR TEST WAS IN 1962,
BUT UNDERGROUND TESTS CONTINUED
UNTIL 1992.
IN KIRK'S TELLING, RESIDENTS,
CIVILIAN WORKERS, AND SOLDIERS
ALIKE PLAYED KEY ROLES IN
NEVADA'S HISTORY AS A NUCLEAR
TESTING SITE, AND, IN A SENSE,
SHARED AN IDENTITY AS COLD WAR
VETERANS.
>> THIS IDENTITY AS A COLD WAR
VETERAN UNITED PEOPLE WHO WERE
VERY, VERY DIFFERENT IN OTHER
RESPECTS.
CALTECH SCIENTISTS OR SANDIA LAB
SCIENTISTS WHO WERE COMMINGLING
WITH LAS VEGAS RESIDENTS WHO,
JUST BY THE CIRCUMSTANCE OF
PROXIMITY TO THE TEST SITE, HAD
BEEN PULLED INTO THIS
EXTRAORDINARY SERIES OF EVENTS.